
**IMPORTANT NOTE:** 

This markdown document provides the main text of Recommendation ITU-T G.191, the Software Tool Library, but it does not reflect the entire text of the Recommendation. 
Please refer to the official Recommendation ITU-T G.191 for the complete text: [https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.191](https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.191)

-=Pagebreak=-

# Recommendation ITU-T G.191 - Software tools for speech and audio coding standardization

## Summary

Recommendation ITU-T G.191 provides source code for speech and audio processing modules for narrowband, wideband and super-wideband telephony applications. The set includes codecs, filters, noise generators.

This edition introduces changes to Annex A, which describes the ITU-T Software Tools (STL) containing a high-quality, portable C code library for speech processing applications. This release of the STL, also known as STL2022, incorporates:

* An implementation of ESDRU (energy-based spatial distortion reference unit) as described in ITU-T P.811.

* An implementation of the loudness measurement algorithm as in ITU-R Rec. BS.1770-4.

Recommendation ITU-T G.191 includes an electronic attachment containing STL2022 and manual.

## Keywords

DSP operators, filters, MNRU, open source, reverb, STL2022, G.711, G.722, G.726, G.728, sv56, BS.1770, ESDRU

## 1. Scope

This Recommendation provides a set of common, coherent and portable signal processing tools to facilitate the development of speech and audio coding algorithms, in particular within the standardization environment where the following situations often happen:

* experimental results generated with different software tools may not be directly compared;

* software tools used by different organizations may not perfectly conform to related ITU‑T Recommendations, which may delay ITU-T standardization processes;

* ITU-T Recommendations may leave scope for different implementations;

* new speech and audio coding standards are increasing in complexity, leading to non‑bitexact specifications; furthermore, appropriate testing procedures to assure interoperability of different implementations are needed.


## 2. References

The following ITU-T Recommendations and other references contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this Recommendation. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All Recommendations and other references are subject to revision; users of this Recommendation are therefore encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the Recommendations and other references listed below. A list of the currently valid ITU-T Recommendations is regularly published. The reference to a document within this Recommendation does not give it, as a stand-alone document, the status of a Recommendation.

---------------  ------------------------------
[ITU-T G.192]    Recommendation ITU-T G.192 (1996), *A common digital parallel interface for speech standardization activities* 
[ITU-T G.711]    Recommendation ITU-T G.711 (1988), *Pulse code modulation (PCM) of voice frequencies*                                                                          
[ITU-T G.712]    Recommendation ITU-T G.712 (2001), *Transmission performance characteristics of pulse code modulation channels*                                                
[ITU-T G.718]    Recommendation ITU-T G.718 (2008), *Frame error robust narrow-band and wideband embedded variable bit-rate coding of speech and audio from 8-32 kbit/s*        
[ITU-T G.722]    Recommendation ITU-T G.722 (2012), *7 kHz audio-coding within 64 kbit/s*                                                                                       
[ITU-T G.726]    Recommendation ITU-T G.722 (1990), *40, 32, 24, 16 kbit/s Adaptive Differential Pulse Code Modulation (ADPCM)*                                                     
[ITU-T G.727]    Recommendation ITU-T G.727 (1990), *5-, 4-, 3- and 2-bit/sample embedded adaptive differential pulse code modulation (ADPCM)*                                  
[ITU-T G.728]    Recommendation ITU-T G.728 (2012), *Coding of speech at 16 kbit/s using low-delay code excited linear prediction*                                               
[ITU-T G.729.1]  Recommendation ITU-T G.729.1 (2006), *G.729-based embedded variable bit-rate coder: An 8-32 kbit/s scalable wideband coder bitstream interoperable with G.729* 
[ITU-T O.41]     Recommendation ITU-T O.41 (1994), *Psophometer for use on telephone-type circuits*                                                                              
[ITU-T P.48]     Recommendation ITU-T P.48 (1988), *Specification for an intermediate reference system*                                                                         
[ITU-T P.56]     Recommendation ITU-T P.56 (2011), *Objective measurement of active speech level*                                                                               
[ITU-T P.341]    Recommendation ITU-T P.341 (2011), *Transmission characteristics for wideband digital loudspeaking and hands-free telephony terminals*                         
[ITU-T P.810]    Recommendation ITU-T P.810 (1996), *Modulated noise reference unit (MNRU)*                                                                                     
[ITU-T P.811]    Recommendation ITU-T P.811 (2019), *Subjective test methodology for evaluating Speech oriented stereo communication systems over headphones*
[ITU-R BS.1770]  Recommendation ITU-R BS.1770-4 (2015), *Algorithms to measure audio programme loudness and true-peak audio level*
-----------------------------------------------

## 3. Definitions

None.

## 4. Abbreviations and acronyms

This Recommendation uses the following abbreviations and acronyms:
   
|||
|------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| FFT     | Fast Fourier Transform |
| FIR     | Finite Impulse Response |
| FIR-IRS | Finite Impulse Response-Intermediate Reference System |
| IIR     | Infinite Impulse Response |
| PCM     | Pulse Code Modulation |
| ROM     | Read Only Memory |
| RPE-LTP | Regular Pulse Excitation-Long Term Prediction |
| STL     | Software Tool Library |
| STL     | Software Tool Library |
| SIMD    | Single Instruction Multiple Data | 
| VLIW    | Very Long Instruction Word |


## 5. Conventions

None.

## 6. Software tools

To clarify the use of the set of software tools, arranged as a software tool library (STL), ITU-T makes the following recommendations:

1) The software tools specified in Annex A should be used as building modules of signal processing blocks to be used in the process of generation of ITU-T Recommendations, particularly those concerned with speech and audio coding algorithms.
1) The software tools specified in Annex A should be used as building modules of signal processing blocks to be used in the process of generation of ITU-T Recommendations, particularly those concerned with speech and audio coding algorithms.

2) Some of the tools shall be used in procedures for the verification of interoperability of ITU‑T standards, mainly of speech and audio coding algorithms whose description is in terms of non-bitexact specifications.

3) The use of these modules should be made strictly in accordance with the technical instructions of their attached documentation, and should respect the following terms.

The software tools are maintained on an open-source collaboration platform [b-STLgit]. The build toolchain is implemented using the CMake framework [b-CMake] to generate build scripts crafted for the target platform and to execute regression tests for each module in the STL.

## 7. License and copyright

The modules in the ITU-T STL are free software; they can be redistributed or modified under the terms of Annex B; this applies to any of the versions of the modules in the STL.

The STL has been carefully tested and it is believed that both the modules and the example programs on their usage conform to their description documents. Nevertheless, the ITU-T STL is provided "as is", in the hope that it will be useful, but without any warranty.

The STL is intended to help the scientific community to achieve new standards in telecommunications more efficiently, and for such must not be sold, entirely or in parts. The original developers, except where otherwise noted, retain ownership of their copyright, and allow their use under the terms and conditions of Annex B.

-=Pagebreak=-
